---
layout: post
title: "Mocking endpoints with ZIO sttp"
date: 2020-07-10 22:00:00 +0200
comments: true
categories: Scala, Functional_Programming, ZIO, sttp
mathjax: true
---

_In this post I want to give a simple example of how to use ZIO modules together with STTP. We will see how to wire different components together and in particular how unit test the http layer. I assume basic ZIO concepts such as environment, layer, error and ZIO aliases (`RIO`, `UIO` etc) are already known to the reader, who can refer to the pretty exhaustive ZIO documentation. The code used along this article is available [here](http://github.com/pierangeloc/wateva)._
<p></p>
<p></p>
<p></p>
Our e-commerce client is working on a marketing campaign. Colleagues from marketing department prepared a list of `CustomerId`, and we are tasked to send each user an email with a promotion for the hot product of our catalogue. The user information is stored in a CRM application that exposes a REST api.

To implement this, for each `CustomerId` we need to:

- lookup for user in the CRM
- if user exists and permission has been granted, send the email
- otherwise just write a log message

### The CRM application
We have a simple implementation of the CRM api we want to use, i.e. an endpoint to fetch a user given a `userId`. You can run such an application with `sbt runMain io.tuliplogic.CRMApp`. Let's test the endpoint with [httpPie](https://httpie.org/):

```
http http://localhost:8080/users/123123
HTTP/1.1 200 OK
Connection: keep-alive
Content-Length: 73
Content-Type: text/plain
Date: Sat, 11 Jul 2020 14:25:19 GMT

{
    "email": "weierstrass@maths.com",
    "promotionOptIn": true,
    "userId": "123123"
}
```

If a user is not found in CRM, the service returns a 404 with emtpy body instead.

### The campaign
Our campaign program is given a `val customerIds: List[CustomerId]` and a simple function to send email `def sendEmail(email: Email): URIO[Console, Unit] = ???`. We will focus on the service responsible for retrieving customer information. Writing a module that exposes such a functionality is pretty straightforward:

```scala
object CustomerBaseService {
  trait Service {
    def getCustomer(customerId: CustomerId): IO[Error, Option[Customer]]
  }

  def getCustomer(customerId: CustomerId): ZIO[CustomerBaseService, Error, Option[Customer]] =
    ZIO.accessM(_.get.getCustomer(customerId))
}
```

With this definition, we can write the campaign program as

```scala
val program: ZIO[Console with CustomerDataService, CustomerDataService.Error, Unit] =
    ZIO.foreach(customerIds) { customerId =>
      CustomerDataService.getCustomer(customerId).flatMap {
        _.fold(console.putStrLn(s"Customer $customerId not found"))( cust =>
          if (cust.promotionOptIn) sendEmail(cust.email)
          else console.putStrLn(s"Not sending email to $customerId")
        )
      }
    }.unit
```

The type of `program` tells us it requires `Console with CustomerDataService`, `Console` being provided by ZIO and `CustomerDataService` must be provided by us.